Revelation Blues

All 222 students of Sacred Heart were in attendance on the 22nd of September. People say that coincidences like these speak volumes of the importance that the day would hold for this town. I smile and agree with them because it's easier.

It was a weird setting for a miracle, a priest preaching to a largely apathetic crowd. Whether it was actual disdain for religion, senseless rebellion against what the average teenager perceived as “the system” or just pure theological laziness; the point remains that as mass reached midpoint on that September morning the amount of heads lulled to sleep by the priest's monotone voice greatly eclipsed those that were listening. I was never able to sleep sitting, so instead I alternated between gently banging my head on the pew in front of me and imagining what might be the worst thing I would be willing to do to not be in church.

"I would totally cut off the last joint of my right pinky, yakuza-style. I don't even use that when playing guitar. Probably wouldn't affect my typing speed that much either. Didn't I read somewhere that they started making prosthetics for the yakuza?"

It took me a while to realize that the total silence that had spread itself through the church wasn't rehearsed.

At first, I thought it was another one of my brain glitches that I always have in class, like when my brain tries to picture what it would be like to throw itself out of a window. But reality usually snaps back into place in that case. This was too long.

Like toddlers rapt in front of the Barney the Dinosaur, everyone’s eyes were locked on the stained glass picture of Jesus on some rock just chilling with some sheep and children. I tried waking up Kevin to my right, but he wouldn't budge. I tried calling to Adrianne, my girlfriend sitting a few pews back, but she was deaf too. For a good minute there was a perfect ethereal silence. As panic started to rise in my throat, I began considering seeing if this problem had spread itself outside of the church, but then the room exploded with the cries of minds torn by a great revelation.

Apparently, that day my school was visited my God himself. He spoke to them. And although their stories diverged slightly based on their location, as the news crews arrived and the pilgrimage of believers to this northern-Ontarian suburb began, the consistency was relatively remarkable.

Initially, nobody was nearly that coherent.

I tried to take in the religious fervor around me. Kevin was biting into the skin of his index until it started bleeding, while Jean wept openly on his shoulder. My physics teacher tried to calm the students nearest to him to try and regain some order. All I needed was one look to understand that this was the last place on earth I wanted to be. I jogged home without saying a word to anyone.

I was beating my head-shot streak when my mother called, pulling me out of my shock.

"Christian, are you okay?", she asked full of concern.

"Yeah."

"What. The. Hell. The school thinks you're dead."

"I panicked. I'm sorry."

"I'll call the school to let them know you're okay. You are absolutely grounded."

It's day two of my fantasy book and guitar marathon that my Mom finally intervenes.

I know that she wants to talk about the newspaper headline this morning, even though she won't say it. The chemical investigation of the church has come up blank. The Vatican has declared my town the site of a genuine miracle.

My mother is just like me. Unable to believe in God. Consequently, she's been shoved into unknown mothering territory.

"So... Do you want me to start driving you to church?" She asks, trying to be supportive, but too afraid to ask about the specifics.

"No. I'm fine with my guitar." I give her a weak smile to try and reassure her.

"Right...", she runs her hand through her hair and sighs before making sure I"m looking her in the eye, "I was really worried when the school called me and said you were missing in the middle of the most messed up event of anyone's life. I'm still angry that you didn't know better than to call me, but I get I can see your perspective a bit more now that I've had time to think about it. I think it would be best for you to talk to some other people who understand what you're going through." 

"So... The grounding has been lifted?"

"Temporarily. You and I both know staying inside isn't going to be any good. Why don't you go see Adrianne?"

Her suggestion brings back up the fear in my chest, which I've been trying to quell with escapist fantasy books and guitar. My mom is right about needing to go see Adrianne, although not for the reasons she insinuated.

As I ride my bike through the bush towards Adrianne's house, I can't help but think of all the other times I've ridden this way. The first time her parents were out of town. When she called me in tears after her grandfather died.

I held her hand as we walked through her backyard into the forest.

"I guess what bothers me the most is the idea that everything ends. That eventually everyone you know will die and eventually everyone will die and there will be no one left and there will be no trace of what happened or what we did. It's selfish to think about it now... I know I should be thinking about my grandmother and what she's going through, but it keeps jumping in my head."

"Have you mentioned this to your parents?"

"They're too old-school. They don't get it."

"What you said is true, about nothing being rememebered forever, but it doesn't mean that everything is pointless. The way I see it, everyone gets a small spark in the darkness to spend. It's how you choose to spend it that matters. I would rather have a brief beautiful spark, then a violent one, even if no one remembers it."

She doesn't say anything as she opens the door. Her smile is radiant as she pulls me in and kisses me hard on the lips. She pulls my body inwards towards her. I'm relieved at this small reassurance that maybe things haven't changed that much.

She pulls back for a moment and looks me right in the eye: "I'm so glad God gave you to me."

My stomach reacts immediately.

I try to keep kissing her and overcompensate in an effort to ignore my fear, but her lips turn cold as the heat of the moment leaves the room.

I can't really blame her, she didn't know that her words would stab me in the gut. She thinks I saw the same blinding light, the same ominous voice demanding that love and faith be spread throughout the world. I'm too afraid of the conflict to tell her right now. So I change the topic, to what's easiest to talk about, other people.

As she tells me the various anecdotes, it hits me that the weirdest thing is how everyone became so damn good. And I mean stereotypical, white-shining-halos-of-acceptance-and-forgiveness-around-everyone type of good. Kevin took a vow of poverty, Jean is trying to become a travelling preacher, others people I don't really know are staying to welcome the flow of pilgrims. Probably most them scaring the living shit out of their parents with their piety.

"So now that you know what God wants, does it make you feel kind of guilty of how you lived?", her tone is cautious.

I can't look her in the eyes. "I... I didn't see anything."

"What?", her brows knot together, "Nothing?"

"Well, I saw everyone in a trance." I smile in a naive attempt to lessen the impact.

Her face is blank as she thinks this over and my inner optimist wins. She still has her own values. I still love her. She still loves me. I can accept her changes and our differences and she can accept mine.

"You mean, you haven't accepted Jesus as your saviour?" Or maybe not...

"Are you surprised?" The inner optimist has been pulled off stage by my old friend anger.

"Isn't everyone's proof enough for you?"

"Calling it proof is a little ridiculous. It's just something you saw. I wouldn't say it verifies an omni-potent being. Let alone the one described in Christianity."

"<i>That's ridiculous</i>, what would be enough proof for you?"

That makes me stop to think for a moment.

"I don't know. Nothing as simple as a vision."

"So you just think we're all crazy?"

"No. I just think you had a brain glitch and then you interpreted it how you wanted."

"Oh, so you think we're stupid?"

"I think you're mistaken."

I'm afraid that I'm talking too fast. I feel like I need to write stuff down, but she's right back at it.

"You can't use science to explain everything.", her claim is barely related, but I don't care at this point, I'll take anything.

"Yeah, but that doesn't mean I have to worship, submit and become exploited. I just don't understand how a vision can make you lose your ability to think for yourself."

She is silent as tears gather in her eyes. This is the first time I've made her cry.

"I can't be with someone who thinks this way about me."

I open my mouth, but decide there isn't anything here I want to salvage.

I pause in the doorway, "You don't owe me anything, but I'm hoping that you can find it in yourself to keep this a secret. I still have to live in this fucking born again town for two more years. I don't want to fight with everyone for that whole time." I don't wait for her answer.

I bike as fast as I can home, thinking about all the ways you can lose a person.

Now, most nights, I fall asleep dreaming about burning this whole city down. In the dead of night, armed with the kerosene stored in my parents shed, I would start at the mega-church, continue down to the Christian gift stores and then finish off the town hall. I would laugh with relief as the flames began licking up the polished wood. My figure would be silhouetted against a backdrop of ordered destruction, an acceleration of natural entropy, to things as they were before.

Deep down, I know this is a stereotypical teenage fantasy with all the usual motifs of destruction, escape and resurrection. I think it's the last one I want most.

So let’s say there is a God. Why didn't I get to see what everyone else saw? Was I too blasphemous, was I wasting my life, or did God just look at me and say: 'Yeah, don’t bother with this one. He’s a lost cause.'

Before the 'miracle', I was leaning towards the disbelief. I lack the ability to believe in a God. I remember reading somewhere that some people just don’t have that part in their brains. They can’t hold on to faith like everyone else.

I walk to school the next day uncertain whether there will be a lynch mob waiting for me as I go through the doors. Luckily, everything seems normal. Well, comparatively normal given that an entire school suffered a mass hallucination. We start off the day with an assembly in the gymnasium. I'm one of the first to arrive, so I get to watch the rest of my classmates trickle in. I almost burst out laughing when I see a group of them walk in wearing white robes and then feel kind of guilty when I notice when Kevin is among them. I may have just invented a new form of survivor's guilt.

Our principal reminds us that an education is essential to spreading the word of God and if anything we should now be more motivated to learn than ever. I'm going to guess by the massive absence of students today that a few of them begged to differ. She looks like she hasn't slept since the miracle. My mom told me that she fought to keep the school open for the rest of the year, but the school board seems intent on dissolving the school afterwards. Even if it wasn't dissolved, I can't imagine anyone crazy enough to enrol next year. I wouldn't want my first year in high school to be with a bunch of religious fanatics.

Kevin comes over after school on Friday under the pretence of wanting to play videogames, but he sits down on my couch without picking up the controller.  It seems surreal.

"Seriously, what do you think of the robe?"

"I think it brings out your eyes."

"Jean convinced me it was a good idea. He gave me a passage in the Bible where it says you should always wear white. He said it would symbolize how from that day on we are changed. I'm starting to think it's kind of stupid."

"Do me a favour. Try and close your eyes and imagine that day again. Now compare it to your other memories. Do you notice anything weird?"

"Uh, I'm not sure what you're getting at."

"What did you have breakfast that morning?"

"Toast?"

"Are you sure?"

"Yeah..."

"That's exactly it. You're 100% sure about the toast. You can probably even know it's exact texture. Everyone else I talk to is the same way. Jean can remember how the stain glass window was reflected in my iris. It's been a week, but nothing has changed or morphed like other memories do. And it goes right down to the most trivial details. Do you know how effed up that is? It's like God came along and punched my life in the goals. I feel like I couldn't leave this thing even if I wanted to. You know I wanted more than anything to make videogames, now I can't make one without relating it to this, which sucks -Sorry-. I am living Deus Ex Machina and I know it's bad story-telling."

"Well, your character could investigate. Find the explanation behind the phenomenon."

"You know, I think I would be happier if there was a mundane explanation. Okay, I know that knowing God loves me isn't supposed to be a burden and without it I probably wouldn't be happier, but I'm still afraid. Does it make sense, to be a bit afraid of all the work you have to do, even if you know that you will love the work and all the struggle will have meaning?"

I lie. ""

"It's like I'm trying to induce post-miracle me to pre-miracle me. 'What did we see in video-games?', 'Well it's an interactive media form', 'Can we use it to spread the word of God?', 'Maybe?'"

"Pre-miracle me is freaked out by post-miracle me."

And I keep on lying until he goes home. It takes me a while to realize that now there is a discrete separation between who I am and how my friends see me that I've never had before. Never had the need to have before. All the emo music that Kevin gave me a while back is starting to make a lot more sense to me.

Like the visions inside their heads, the motivation of my friends doesn't diminish either and I start to play along for fear of being found out. I start keeping track of "religious points" in my head. Make sure that my weekly average is high enough, because I assume that this must be better than being alone.

Eventually, I find a legitimate reason to flee in the form of university. As I pack up my stuff into my Mom's car, I hug everyone and promise to call and to continue to spread the word. Instead, I change my phone number. I feel the closest thing to relief that I've felt in years.

As those who have come before me, I find like-minded folks and I completely deny my past. "Oh no, I’m from the town beside the crazy one."

I'm in the third month of my first semester, when I stumble into the cafeteria with my friends and see a stage assembled in the middle complete with speakers and a flowing banner saying “Converted and Proud”. Jean stands at the forefront of it all armed with a microphone. Adrianne is right by his side. They're preaching the usual "The only way into the kingdom of heaven is Jesus. God loved you so much he gave Jesus to die for your sins."

Had it been anyone except for Jean and Adrianne, I probably would have been fine. 

If I could just stay calm among the screams in my head, I could back away slowly and... Fuck. Jean saw me and practically jumped for joy. “Well if it isn't Christian. C’mon Christian get up on stage and be a witness to the awesome power of Jesus. Tell these people what you saw.” My new friends are bewildered. I don’t blame them or hold it against them. I get up on stage and as per usual the stage fright swallows me whole. Jean looks right in my eyes and the cameras blink expectantly. “Well, um... On the 22nd I... I guess it was like...” I look at Adrianne and she looks at me like she's disappointed. And then it hits me. I can’t go on like this. Not in the dramatic Hollywood sense, but I consider the rest of my life lying at every turn and I realize that I just can’t. I would be too fucking miserable. “Godfuckingdammit.” I sigh this word out and gather my anxious strength, “Guys I didn't see anything. I saw all of you staring up like complete idiots and I faked that I saw something too." 

I feel the anger well up inside of me again, but decide to let it go. "And even if I did see something, it wouldn't have converted me. I cannot parse your definition. Everything you call God is just something science hasn't explained yet and I just call the unknown. And maybe science never will find the answers, but I feel no special attachment to that." Slowly, I realize what I should have said to Adrianne two years ago. "That doesn't make me better than you, it just means I took another path. I don't understand why you can't accept me or anyone else who feels this way."

I feel hollow as I handed back the microphone to a confused and hurt Jean. “Jeez man, you knew this was coming.” is all I can muster. Adrianne smiles at me as I walk off the stage. Then I walk (didn’t run, couldn’t run no matter how much I wanted to) out the door with a hundred eyes on my back. It was like that Eastern-European book with all the sex, “The Unbearable Feeling of Lightness”. One of the central themes of that book is this girl that keeps on cutting off ties and fleeing from her past. Except in that book, they always make these “betrayals” sound like a bad things that cause you to completely lose touch with life and float off into oblivion. Thus the “unbearable” lightness. For me, it was the first time that I understood absolute freedom. 

One of my new friends catches up to me: “Dude, I totally thought you were going to come out of the closet there.” I laugh with him and it is the greatest feeling in the world. 

Explanation:
So I’ve been wanting to write this story for years now. About a mass revelation and the one guy who misses out. At first the story was going all angsty and confrontational and atheist.  I wanted dramatic confessions and great burdens... But then, I couldn't make my character do that. He was like: “Dude, I dream about  burning the town down. I don’t actually plan it.” Then I wanted to do it about the confrontation with his parents: “Nope. They’re actually pretty chill.” So instead it’s about how truth will set you free and cut you off and burn you a little. It’s about how your friends change, but it’s all good because they’re still your friends they’ve just evolved and if they didn’t think it would be weird. The only thing I’m proud of is I kept it small and still fit a bunch of symbolism in it. This bitch was swelling to 10 pages at one point before I put him on a diet. God I’m tired...

Problems:
I think this story is boring because there's no tension, no dread. Am I right?
